GAW configuration

The configuration is a 100644 blob at .gaw/config in the independent GAW
tree. Edit it in the GAW worktree, not the ordinary project worktree.
It declares allowed workspace paths; the CLI does not interpret their
natural-language contents.

Versions and syntax

The top level is a keyword/value plist with a required :workspace list and
an optional non-negative decimal integer :version. Top-level keyword names
use [a-z][a-z0-9-]*. Duplicate keys and malformed values are rejected.
Future versions must put :version first after the opening parenthesis,
apart from whitespace or comments. Existing configs with no leading version
continue through the original parser, including a later :version 0 or 1.
That compatibility path cannot protect unknown future syntax; put the
version first in every new version.

Without :version, the original format is implicit v0:

    (:workspace
     ((:directory "memory")
      (:directory "skills")))

Explicit v0 uses the same workspace structure:

    (:version 0
     :workspace
     ((:file "CONTEXT.md")
      (:directory "notes")))

V0 has no role information. V1 accepts optional role groups together with
direct declarations:

    (:version 1
     :workspace
     ((:memory ((:directory "notes") (:file "CONTEXT.md")))
      (:archive ((:directory "history")))
      (:skills ((:directory "agent-skills")))
      (:directory "misc")))

git gaw init generates (:version 1 :workspace ()) without predefined
directories. Declarations need not exist in the tree and do not create files
or directories.

Role groups

A group contains a list of :file/:directory entries, so even one entry needs
the extra list: (:memory ((:directory "notes"))).
Role names match [a-z][a-z0-9-]*; file and directory are reserved for entries.
Custom names such as research are legal without warnings. A role group may
appear repeatedly, retaining declaration order. Groups cannot contain other
role groups. No role is required.

The decoder preserves metadata and flattens all declarations into the same
effective workspace. Roles add no path coverage, inheritance, precedence or
ref protection. Their workflow meaning belongs in skills or project guidance;
directory names do not invent declared roles for v0 or direct entries.

Paths and coverage

Paths are literal Git paths relative to the GAW worktree root. They must be
nonempty and canonical, using / separators: no absolute or trailing /, empty
components, . or .. components, or backslashes. A root .gaw component and any
.git component are reserved, with ASCII case-insensitive comparison.

A :file entry permits the named Git file entry; a :directory permits its
subtree. Necessary ancestor trees are allowed. If a declared path is present,
its Git kind must match; supported file entries are regular blobs, executable
blobs and symlink blobs. The config itself must remain a 100644 blob.
Project-parent trees must not track declared workspace paths or reserved GAW
paths, including conflicting ancestor/descendant paths.
Ordinary directory ancestors may remain when their contents stay disjoint;
an ancestor file occupying a declared path's route is a conflict.

Nested declarations are allowed, including across roles, without role
inheritance or override semantics. Identical paths are rejected even if their
kinds or groups differ. The reserved .gaw namespace is protocol content, not
a workspace declaration.

Parsing is restricted to lists, keywords, strings, decimal integers and
semicolon comments, without reader macros or evaluation. Strings support
escaped double quotes and backslashes; path validation still rejects a
decoded backslash. Invalid UTF-8, a BOM, unsupported escapes and literal ASCII
control characters in strings are rejected. Limits are 65,536 config bytes,
16 list levels, 1,024 flattened declarations and 4,096 UTF-8 bytes per path.
For an unknown leading version, a shared structural scan enforces the byte,
encoding, nesting, string and single-form limits without decoding its
version-specific body. Missing or malformed leading versions and structural
failures remain invalid.

Diagnostics and compatibility

V0 rejects unknown top-level fields. V1 ignores their meaning and retains a
field-name warning; their values must still satisfy restricted syntax and
limits. check reports HEAD and index warnings separately; status shows them
under the relevant branch. Warnings do not invalidate the config or change
exit status. Other commands and the protection hook do not print them.
A field changing core protocol semantics needs a new config version.

Unsupported numbers and unrecognized leading version tokens are not guessed
as v0/v1. They make committed-state inspection indeterminate, and the hook
blocks branch movement even if the config marker stays unchanged; use a
compatible CLI. Other syntax/schema errors remain errors. The released
v0.5.0 executable cannot protect future syntax it cannot parse.
New CLIs read supported old configs; older CLIs need not understand v1.
Each historical checkpoint is interpreted with its own config, not today's
HEAD config, and no history migration is required.

HEAD and staged configs are read independently from immutable Git objects.
Unstaged edits are not included in check or commit. A new checkpoint cannot
change paths both inside and outside .gaw/: stage and commit those changes
separately while keeping each candidate valid. check does not replace this
commit-transition rule. See git gaw help check and git gaw help commit.
